Title: AI for social media: How to boost your social media strategy
Published Date: 2023-09-15T00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/ai-for-social-media

You’re staring at a blank computer screen with your fingers hovering over the keyboard. You’re the company’s social media manager, and the onus is on you to come up with engaging copy and a graphic design brief to send to your team. This post needs to go up — stat. Time is running out, and the content might go cold if you're too late.

Constantly identifying your target audience’s wants among shifting tastes and trends is a near-impossible task. And even if you nail the appeal every time, coming up with a steady stream of fresh ideas is a surefire way to run head-first into burnout.

To keep your focus sharp and your creative spark alive, consider turning to artificial intelligence (AI). With the right tools, you can access a digital aide that scans the internet for information, learns to understand your key demographic, and conjures posts in sync with your marketing strategy. Once you have a plethora of ideas, you can pick and choose the best foundation and level up the content with your unique touch.

Creativity doesn't always go hand-in-hand with looming deadlines, whether you’re tasked with topical Tweets or scheduled Stories. AI may be the solution to your creative block — and more.

What are artificial intelligence tools for social media?

Social media AI tools are emerging software applications that use the power of machine learning to optimize social media strategy and create interesting content.

These tools aren't here to replace you. Instead, they supplement your workflow and perform time-consuming and repetitive tasks to give you more time for other tasks.

For example, you could ask AI to analyze huge amounts of internet data to find consumer patterns, preferences, and insights. Now you have a bank of new information to make educated guesses about your audience's changing interests and fine-tune your social media strategy in a fraction of the time it would’ve taken you to manually sort through that data yourself.

Once you've polished your marketing blueprint, you can turn to AI for content creation. AI tools can tackle more work than you can imagine, from choosing hashtags to creating digital art. And the right prompts and inputs can produce stunning visuals and compelling copy.

What to look for in an AI tool for social media

Not all AI tools are created equal. With hundreds of technologies out there, choosing the right option for your specific needs can be a time-consuming process. Here are a few things to consider when looking for an AI tool to bolster your social media strategy:

AI types — a well-rounded social media content generator uses various AI technologies, including:Natural language processing (NLP) — NLP allows machines to read, understand, and produce natural-sounding text, facilitating tasks like sentiment analysis and automated captions.Machine learning (ML) — thanks to ML, machines can use algorithms to recognize data patterns and predict user behavior, trends, and engagement.Generative AI — this technology uses prompts and existing data to create original content, including text, images, graphics, and videos.Image recognition AI — AI can automatically detect and tag specific elements in multimedia, allowing you to categorize visual information into alt text, captions, subtitles, and more.User-friendliness — even with their advanced functionality, AI tools should be easy to use. Look for technology that’s intuitive and accessible to anyone, from beginners to experienced programmers.Social media support — any AI tool you use should seamlessly integrate with multiple social media platforms, allowing you to control all your profiles in one place. This way, you can create, schedule, and monitor posts without switching between different dashboards.Automation — arguably the most important quality of any AI social media tool is the ability to let it do the heavy lifting for you. By creating and scheduling posts in advance, you can rest assured that relevant content goes up at convenient times for readers worldwide. Data analysis and insights — AI tools provide in-depth reports and analytics that you can use to polish your posts, adapt to trends, and make data-driven decisions for future social media and marketing campaigns.

AI types — a well-rounded social media content generator uses various AI technologies, including:

Natural language processing (NLP) — NLP allows machines to read, understand, and produce natural-sounding text, facilitating tasks like sentiment analysis and automated captions.Machine learning (ML) — thanks to ML, machines can use algorithms to recognize data patterns and predict user behavior, trends, and engagement.Generative AI — this technology uses prompts and existing data to create original content, including text, images, graphics, and videos.Image recognition AI — AI can automatically detect and tag specific elements in multimedia, allowing you to categorize visual information into alt text, captions, subtitles, and more.

Natural language processing (NLP) — NLP allows machines to read, understand, and produce natural-sounding text, facilitating tasks like sentiment analysis and automated captions.

Machine learning (ML) — thanks to ML, machines can use algorithms to recognize data patterns and predict user behavior, trends, and engagement.

Generative AI — this technology uses prompts and existing data to create original content, including text, images, graphics, and videos.

Image recognition AI — AI can automatically detect and tag specific elements in multimedia, allowing you to categorize visual information into alt text, captions, subtitles, and more.

User-friendliness — even with their advanced functionality, AI tools should be easy to use. Look for technology that’s intuitive and accessible to anyone, from beginners to experienced programmers.

Social media support — any AI tool you use should seamlessly integrate with multiple social media platforms, allowing you to control all your profiles in one place. This way, you can create, schedule, and monitor posts without switching between different dashboards.

Automation — arguably the most important quality of any AI social media tool is the ability to let it do the heavy lifting for you. By creating and scheduling posts in advance, you can rest assured that relevant content goes up at convenient times for readers worldwide.

Data analysis and insights — AI tools provide in-depth reports and analytics that you can use to polish your posts, adapt to trends, and make data-driven decisions for future social media and marketing campaigns.

How to implement AI in your social media strategy

Once you find the perfect AI tool for your social media needs, it’s time to put it into practice. Here are six things you can do to get started:

1. Brainstorm ideas

AI can serve as a valuable source of inspiration. It develops creative ideas based on current events, target audiences, and user behavior, making it an excellent tool for content creators and social media teams with limited resources.

By brainstorming ideas, AI tools can help create content that resonates with your followers and aligns with your brand's messaging and aesthetic.

2. Create content

The potential of AI-powered tools goes beyond brainstorming. You can leverage them to produce content, too. Compelling copywriting, high-quality generative imagery, and even video clips — the results are pretty groundbreaking.

With generative AI, you can stockpile content to post more often and ensure each piece of content going out maintains your brand's visual guidelines, tone, and consistency.

3. Perform a sentiment analysis

Social media is all about creating content, but what if your audience doesn’t react positively?

AI tools can analyze comments, reactions, and brand mentions across multiple social media platforms to see what users and customers have to say about your company and its products and services.

Identifying negative feedback early lets you contact unhappy customers, resolve their problems, and improve your brand's reputation. Plus, you can modify your content to better resonate with your target audience's emotions and preferences.

4. Optimize content

After evaluating your sentiment analysis, you can fine-tune your content strategy to satisfy a wider audience. AI can identify the type of content that drives the highest engagement and help you find the optimal time to schedule and post.

With this data-driven approach, you can automate uploads, receive consistent feedback on outputs, and make minor tweaks to ensure your content reaches the right people at the right time.

5. Automate reports and analysis

AI makes it easier to monitor and assess social media insights. Instead of manually examining performance on each platform, you can use AI-powered technology to retrieve in-depth reports on data, key metrics, trends, and opportunities for improvement.

After weighing the pros and cons of each data-driven suggestion, you can change your existing social media strategy to suit the shifting priorities of the industry and your target market.

6. Use a chatbot for customer service

Chatbots are revolutionizing customer service on social media. AI-powered bots can automate responses and have real-time two-way conversations to address customer questions and resolve basic issues in your social media DMs.

Not only do bots improve the user experience by giving customers near-instant solutions, but they also reduce your support staff's workload, empowering the team to focus on more important tasks like strategy and innovation.

Pair the best AI marketing tools with these 5 templates

AI is an excellent supplementary tool for social media management, but it’s not the only thing you can use to improve your strategy. Combine these five templates with AI support to streamline your socials.

1. Social media calendar

Notion’s social media calendar template has a simple table where you can view all your existing and upcoming posts in one place. It shows the project status, scheduled posts, theme, and social media platform for each item. The entire table is customizable, so you can add or remove as many filters as you please.

2. Content planner

Omar Faruk's content planner has a well-organized framework for keeping tabs on all your social media posts — from ideation to publishing. The calendar view offers a bird’s eye perspective of all your planned content, while the social media icons in the top-most gallery section on the right side of the screen act as visual pointers so you can immediately identify posts.

3. Social media inspiration (w/ Notion AI)

If you're struggling to come up with an idea for your next campaign or can't think of a caption for a holiday post, Notion AI can offer some inspiration. First, enter a brief overview of your company's mission, values, products, and services. Mention any topics you want the AI to cover, and it'll give you some solid content you can then tweak to your liking.

4. AI content planning template

This template pack by Teri Crenshaw uses AI to generate blog articles with relevant titles, headings, and keywords for search engine optimization (SEO). Plus, a helpful video shows you how to use and customize your social media strategy templates.

If you’re looking for more blog-producing AI tools, check out Notion’s blog post generator. Enter your prompt, press “Generate,” and watch the magic happen. You can also duplicate the template for different campaigns and projects.

5. 1,000+ user-generated content prompts

Speaking of prompts, why spend typing out 100-word paragraphs when you can copy and paste one of Miguel Anticona’s 1,000+ prompts into OpenAI’s ChatGPT for AI-inspired social media strategies?

And if you’re still looking for more results ChatGPT can’t deliver, try Notion’s various AI social media post generators for video scripts, ad copy, and social media bios.

Step into a new wave of social media strategies with Notion

Thanks to advances in AI, how we view social media is dramatically transforming. However, even the best AI platforms aren’t perfect, and it's important not to rely on them for all your social media needs.

Ultimately, you and your team represent your brand, whether you’re making great business pitches in conference rooms or sending email campaigns remotely. From writing the perfect email to accomplishing SMART goals, Notion is the ideal tool to help you boost productivity in the workplace and achieve your long-term business vision.