Title: 4 alternatives to Yahoo you should check out
Published Date: 2024-11-22T14:00+02:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/alternatives-to-yahoo

Released in 1997, Yahoo Mail is among the oldest email providers on the market. While it has evolved into a decent platform, several issues have remained. The most noticeable one is the user interface, which looks quite outdated compared to most modern solutions.

Yahoo also has not done much to ensure its platform works seamlessly with major productivity tools that countless individuals and businesses use. Third-party integration is virtually non-existent, and there aren’t many native platforms that would let you expand your workflow.

With all of the above in mind, it is not surprising that many people are looking for alternatives to Yahoo. If you’re among them, this guide will show you how to find a provider that doesn’t come with Yahoo’s limitations and recommend a few options to consider.

What to look for in a Yahoo alternative

Choosing an email provider seems easy at first glance because all platforms look quite similar to an untrained eye. Still, each solution comes with a set of benefits and drawbacks you must consider to avoid committing to an unsuitable platform.

If you need a starting point for your search, consider the following factors when comparing different options:

User interface and cross-platform supportBuilt-in tools and third-party integrationsFeatures and pricingAutomation and customization capabilities

User interface and cross-platform support

Built-in tools and third-party integrations

Features and pricing

Automation and customization capabilities

User interface and cross-platform support

Yahoo doesn’t boast a particularly well-designed interface. Besides the outdated design, you get distracting ads in the inbox and right-hand pane, which is quite frustrating and can damage the user experience.

An ideal alternative doesn’t obstruct your inbox this way—you should get a clean, minimalistic design that provides a smooth workflow through the right number of well-placed features. This balance isn’t easy to strike, so many email providers come with a busy, cluttered interface that isn’t aesthetically pleasing.

Your Yahoo alternative should also ensure design consistency between different platforms. You may not always work from your laptop or desktop, so phone apps or well-optimized mobile browser versions are paramount.

Built-in tools and third-party integrations

Unlike Gmail or Outlook, Yahoo doesn’t have many connected platforms. You only get access to three tools from the inbox:

ContactsCalendarNotepad

Contacts

Calendar

Notepad

While this may be enough for occasional or light use, advanced users will most likely find the platform too limiting. This is especially true because Yahoo doesn’t integrate with major productivity platforms, so using it for daily business tasks might stunt your productivity.

Before committing to an email provider, check its integrations to see whether you’ll have everything you need to go through your workflow without interruptions. You may want to integrate your platform with document editing tools, shared storage, and various other solutions that either come natively with the email provider or can be used as third-party add-ons.

Features and pricing

Every email platform comes with a set of basic features you need to complete your daily correspondence. Still, some solutions offer useful extras that can significantly impact your workflow. This mainly comes down to email organization and management features that keep your inbox clean and ensure you don’t miss important messages.

Specifically, such features include the following:

Smart folders separating important mail from messages that don’t need your immediate attentionFilters and labels, including the option to create custom labels Advanced email search that encompasses the email’s contents, not just the subject

Smart folders separating important mail from messages that don’t need your immediate attention

Filters and labels, including the option to create custom labels

Advanced email search that encompasses the email’s contents, not just the subject

Not all of these features are available for free with every provider, so look for options with a rich free plan or affordable paid tiers.

Automation and customization capabilities

Email has become a big part of how the modern person works and even keeps up with some personal activities. So, having an email provider that only allows you to communicate is no longer enough—you need email tools that help you automate and customize your inbox so that you can focus on the important things without feeling overwhelmed.

Unlike Yahoo, which lacks these core automation features, an ideal email provider should be able to automate major, repetitive inbox management tasks without your manual input. These include tasks like auto-sorting, labeling, filtering, and archiving emails, suggesting quick replies when you’re writing an email, and quickly summarizing long email threads so you don’t have to waste time reading through.

Your email provider should also allow you to set up your email in a way that works for you, with fully customizable layouts that help you stay focused, showing you only what you need when needed. Not many email providers offer this level of customization, even with paid plans. So, it’s essential to check their customization features to see if they truly match your needs.

Keep reading: Discover the steps to delete your Yahoo account and explore efficient alternatives.

4 Yahoo alternatives reviewed

Numerous email platforms have surfaced since Yahoo’s release, so the number of other options might be overwhelming. To help you overcome analysis paralysis, we’ve shortlisted four options:

GmailZoho MailBlueMailNotion Mail

Gmail

Zoho Mail

BlueMail

Notion Mail

Gmail

If you don’t want to move away from Big Tech email platforms but need a more capable solution than Yahoo, Gmail might be worth considering. Its main advantage is that it’s a part of a more robust productivity suite, Google Workspace.

When you create an account, you’ll get access to platforms to which Yahoo doesn’t have equivalents, most notably:

Google Docs for document editingGoogle Drive for file storageGoogle Sheets for spreadsheet creation

Google Docs for document editing

Google Drive for file storage

Google Sheets for spreadsheet creation

Each of these tools is feature-rich enough to let you create a streamlined workflow, and Gmail itself might be suitable for an average user. However, despite its deep integration with Google Workspace, you may find that its email-specific productivity tools are somewhat basic.

It offers standard organizational features like filters and labels, but advanced automation and customization options are limited. For instance:

Gmail’s AI-powered email summarization is not a standard feature; it’s only available on Google’s paid plans. Inbox customization options are limited, relying on features like folders, labels, themes, and inbox types.Smart Compose exists, but you can only get contextual AI email composition on the paid plan.

Gmail’s AI-powered email summarization is not a standard feature; it’s only available on Google’s paid plans.

Inbox customization options are limited, relying on features like folders, labels, themes, and inbox types.

Smart Compose exists, but you can only get contextual AI email composition on the paid plan.

This can hinder workflow efficiency for power users who require email-specific productivity tools. Here’s a summary of the benefits and drawbacks of Gmail:

ProsConsAccess to additional toolsClean, modern user interfaceMulti-platform supportLimited automation optionsBasic inbox customization

Pros

Cons

Access to additional tools

Clean, modern user interface

Multi-platform support

Limited automation options

Basic inbox customization

Keep reading: Is your Gmail not syncing with your iPhone mail app? Find out how to fix this issue in a few simple steps and explore top Gmail app alternatives.

Zoho Mail

Zoho Mail is a popular provider among personal and business users because of its solid free plan paired with affordable paid tiers. The platform comes with some handy features, particularly in the email organization area.

You can use Advanced Search to browse your emails’ contents and find the threads and information you need quickly. There’s also an option to sort attachments by type for a clearer overview.

A particularly convenient feature is email sharing. You can share a draft before sending it to discuss it with a team member. Folder sharing is also available, so you can send entire batches for approval or delegate emails more seamlessly.

When it comes to advanced automation and customization, it can get tricky. Zoho does offer features like the Zia AI assistant for email composition and summarization or admin consoles for tailored inbox customization, but these are largely locked behind paid subscriptions. Zoho’s most robust workflow productivity features are mainly on the premium account, making it less than ideal if you don’t want a paid email subscription.

Another notable disadvantage is limited storage. You only get 5 GB with the free account, which may not be enough. You also don’t get access to document editing tools—you’d need to upgrade to Zoho Workplace to use them.

The pros and cons of using Zoho Mail are outlined below:

ProsConsAdvanced email searchRobust organization toolsEmail draft sharingLimited free storageNo document editing tools included for free

Pros

Cons

Advanced email search

Robust organization tools

Email draft sharing

Limited free storage

No document editing tools included for free

Keep reading: Check out popular Zoho mail alternatives in our comparison guide and find out how Zoho Mail compares to Office 365.

BlueMail

If you want to keep your Yahoo account but want to move away from its busy interface, BlueMail can be a good alternative. It’s an email client that supports all providers, so you can sign up using your Yahoo email and enjoy a much better interface and additional features.

BlueMail lets you add multiple email accounts and manage them from a unified inbox, which is helpful if you have separate work and business emails but don’t wish to use multiple platforms. You can organize emails into clusters based on sender or group, which is beneficial for surface-level organization but may be cumbersome if you need more granular sorting.

If you heavily rely on AI for email composition and summarization, BlueMail offers GemAI, a helpful generative AI assistant. However, this feature is not robust enough to perform automated tasks or manage your workflow.

The platform also comes with an integrated calendar, which you can share with others to ensure easier collaboration. You can sync the calendar with your account and add .ics files to migrate your events and schedule.

A notable benefit of BlueMail is that it doesn’t store your emails on its servers. Your provider (Yahoo, in this case) directly manages them, so the potential attack surface doesn’t expand to another platform.

Check out the benefits and downsides of using BlueMail:

ProsConsUnified inboxClusters for easy organizationNo email storage on serversNo dedicated email addressLacks robust AI-automation features

Pros

Cons

Unified inbox

Clusters for easy organization

No email storage on servers

No dedicated email address

Lacks robust AI-automation features

Notion Mail

Notion Mail isn’t just another email client; it’s a productivity-first email provider designed to fundamentally change how you experience email. It empowers you to build a completely customized email workspace, adapting to your specific workflows to boost your productivity.

Its core features help you organize your mail into personalized views that contain only the information you need to see. This can help you prioritize important dates, events, clients, projects, and other relevant information. Due to its advanced features, you may experience a slight learning curve as you become familiar with the innovative tool.

Notion Mail seamlessly integrates with the rest of Notion’s productivity suite and is built with the same easy-to-use interface as the core Notion app. For enhanced workflow productivity, you enjoy the following key features:

AI-powered email summarization to get a quick grasp of long threadsQuick-insert templates to swiftly respond to commonly received inquiriesAI-suggested, intuitive short replies to limit manual responsesThe /schedule command to effortlessly schedule meetings from your email and avoid conflicts in your calendarPowerful search functionality to help you find information quicklyCustomizable views that allow you to create “inboxes within an inbox,” dedicating each view to specific tasks, clients, projects, etc. Autopilot automation to sort, label, and prioritize your emails automatically and intuitivelySupport for browsers, macOS, iOS, Android, and Windows

AI-powered email summarization to get a quick grasp of long threads

Quick-insert templates to swiftly respond to commonly received inquiries

AI-suggested, intuitive short replies to limit manual responses

The /schedule command to effortlessly schedule meetings from your email and avoid conflicts in your calendar

Powerful search functionality to help you find information quickly

Customizable views that allow you to create “inboxes within an inbox,” dedicating each view to specific tasks, clients, projects, etc.

Autopilot automation to sort, label, and prioritize your emails automatically and intuitively

Support for browsers, macOS, iOS, Android, and Windows

It’s important to note that Notion Mail is a standalone Gmail client, which means users will need a Google or Gmail account to sign up.

Create a productive workspace with Notion Mail’s suite

When you sign up for Notion Mail, you’ll immediately gain access to many advanced productivity tools for email management, as well as a Notion Calendar integration to help you manage your schedule and appointments efficiently.

See the pros and cons of switching to Notion Mail:

ProsConsUnified workspace for efficient workflowQuick replies using AI generationAI-powered summarizationAI autopilot for email prioritizationOne-click reusable snippetsCross-platform support and integrationsSlight learning curve because of its advanced featuresOnly available to Gmail/Google users

Pros

Cons

Unified workspace for efficient workflow

Quick replies using AI generation

AI-powered summarization

AI autopilot for email prioritization

One-click reusable snippets

Cross-platform support and integrations

Slight learning curve because of its advanced features

Only available to Gmail/Google users

Sign up for Notion Mail

You can get started with Notion Mail in just one step by connecting your Gmail or Google account to Notion. All essential features are available with the free plan, but if you want additional AI assistance, you can purchase the Notion AI add-on.

Bonus read: Want to see how other email providers compare? Explore our other resources to expand your knowledge:

Alternatives to Apple MailFastmail vs. Proton MailZoho Mail vs. GmailAndroid Outlook alternativeProton Mail vs. GmailTutanota vs. Proton MailApple Mail vs. OutlookBest Proton Mail alternativesApple Mail vs. OutlookBusiness Gmail vs. personal Gmail

Alternatives to Apple Mail

Fastmail vs. Proton Mail

Zoho Mail vs. Gmail

Android Outlook alternative

Proton Mail vs. Gmail

Tutanota vs. Proton Mail

Apple Mail vs. Outlook

Best Proton Mail alternatives

Apple Mail vs. Outlook

Business Gmail vs. personal Gmail