Title: Martha Stewart rounds out Block by Block agenda with one week to go!
Published Date: 2022-02-22T07:00-08:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/block-by-block-martha-stewart

With one week to go before Block by Block, we’re gearing up to bring you an incredible mix of speakers — from Ira Glass to Bumble President Tariq Shaukat — new feature announcements, and expert sessions on personal productivity and team success. To close out our speaker lineup, we couldn’t be more thrilled to have Martha Stewart join us on stage!

Martha Stewart is the founder of the first multi-channel lifestyle company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, as well as a bestselling author and Emmy award-winning TV show host. Reaching more than 100 million devoted fans every month, Martha is the go-to source for everyday living. As an incredible business leader, she’s built enormous teams, brands that resonate everywhere, and a cultural movement that influences millions. She’s the original expert on organizing life!

Hospitality has always been a core inspiration for us as we aim to make Notion a differentiated experience — across our product, our community programs, our customer support, and everywhere else, especially as we grow. Our customer experience team started with our CEO Ivan answering user questions and troubleshooting himself. And ever since, we’ve wanted to scale that level of quality and attention to detail. We want people to feel at home and excited to share Notion, and to help companies do the same for their teams. This is something Martha in particular has scaled as a leader and icon.

Martha will be in conversation with our Head of Customer Experience Emma Auscher (who brings a distinguished background in hospitality herself) delving into the tactics of how to create environments that both individuals and large teams love and feel inspired by. They’ll cover everything from how to create meaningful experiences spanning software and in-person, to tech history, to how you can make your day a little lovelier.

We hope you’ll drop by on March 2nd to hear Martha’s wisdom and expertise. See you there!

Save your spot now →