Title: How to delete a Yahoo account: A step-by-step guide
Published Date: 2024-11-22T10:00+02:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/delete-yahoo-account

Yahoo is among the oldest and most popular email providers, but many users don’t believe it meets their standards. The service receives frequent complaints about issues ranging from temporary bugs to random account disappearances.

Whether you’ve encountered such problems or wish to use another provider for another reason, you can delete a Yahoo account in a few simple steps. Note that there are several tasks you must complete beforehand, so this guide outlines the cancellation process from start to finish.

The article also offers an alternative email solution to consider if productivity and efficiency are your priorities in email services.

What to do before deleting a Yahoo account

If you’ve been using your Yahoo email for a while, deleting it haphazardly might not be a good idea. Take the following steps before closing your account:

Cancel any active subscriptionsExport contacts and important dataRemove linked accounts and third-party access

Cancel any active subscriptions

Export contacts and important data

Remove linked accounts and third-party access

Cancel your subscriptions

If you’re subscribed to Yahoo services, you must cancel all subscriptions before you can delete your account. There should be no outstanding balance or active subscriptions for at least 90 days to complete the closure. It is pretty inconvenient if you want to delete the account immediately, but there is no way around this rule.

To review and cancel your subscriptions, follow these steps:

Visit the My Subscriptions pageChoose the subscription you want to cancel and click ManageSelect your reason for the cancellationClick Cancel my subscription

Visit the My Subscriptions page

Choose the subscription you want to cancel and click Manage

Select your reason for the cancellation

Click Cancel my subscription

Double-check whether all your subscriptions are removed. You can also click the View Canceled Subscriptions button to confirm everything is there.

Export your data and contacts

To ensure no important information stays behind when you delete your Yahoo account, you should export and store it locally. Yahoo lets you download all your data, including:

Billing informationData used for personalized adsAccount activityData collected by Yahoo’s partners

Billing information

Data used for personalized ads

Account activity

Data collected by Yahoo’s partners

Downloading your data takes only a few steps:

Visit the Privacy DashboardClick the Manage Your Information tab and scroll down to Download and view your Yahoo dataClick Download my dataChoose Yahoo’s services from which you want to download data. You can click Select All if you want to download everythingClick NextEnter the email to which you want to receive a notification when your data is ready for download. Make sure this isn’t the same address you’ll deleteClick Request Download

Visit the Privacy Dashboard

Click the Manage Your Information tab and scroll down to Download and view your Yahoo data

Click Download my data

Choose Yahoo’s services from which you want to download data. You can click Select All if you want to download everything

Click Next

Enter the email to which you want to receive a notification when your data is ready for download. Make sure this isn’t the same address you’ll delete

Click Request Download

You must export your contacts separately, which you can do directly from your inbox by following these steps:

Click the contacts icon at the top of the right-hand menuClick the three-dot icon on the rightChoose Export to CSV file

Click the contacts icon at the top of the right-hand menu

Click the three-dot icon on the right

Choose Export to CSV file

Remove third-party access and connected accounts

If you’ve used your Yahoo email for any services beyond the provider’s, you must remove it and change the connected email address. The way to do this depends on the service, so review all your subscriptions (paid newsletters, streaming services, etc.) and change the address to the one you’ll use after deleting your Yahoo account.

Unlike many email providers, Yahoo offers dedicated child accounts with parental control connected to the main account. If you have such linked accounts, delete them before removing yours.

The process of deleting a linked account is the same as for the primary one, and the following section will guide you through it.

How to delete a Yahoo account

You can close your Yahoo account from the aforementioned Privacy Dashboard. Once you open it, follow these steps:

Go to the Manage Your Information tabScroll all the way to Delete your Yahoo Account and click Delete My AccountRead through the provided notice and click ContinueConfirm your login credentialsClick Yes, I want to close this account

Go to the Manage Your Information tab

Scroll all the way to Delete your Yahoo Account and click Delete My Account

Read through the provided notice and click Continue

Confirm your login credentials

Click Yes, I want to close this account

Your account won’t be deleted immediately. It takes at least 30 days for the deletion to take effect, with users in some countries and regions having to wait up to 180 days. The following table breaks down such exceptions:

Country/regionDeletion periodAustralia90 daysBrazil180 daysHong Kong180 daysIndia90 daysNew Zealand90 daysTaiwan180 days

Country/region

Deletion period

Australia

90 days

Brazil

180 days

Hong Kong

180 days

India

90 days

New Zealand

90 days

Taiwan

180 days

If you log into your account during this timeframe, your account will be reactivated, and you’ll need to repeat the deletion process.

Why users are deleting Yahoo accounts (and what to use instead)

Yahoo Mail still has an active user base, but many factors contribute to its declining popularity, especially for users who seek organization and efficiency. Despite the recent efforts from Yahoo to upgrade the app with basic AI-powered functionalities, it is still lacking when it comes to delivering seamless productivity and a personalized workflow.

Managing a high volume of emails in Yahoo Mail is challenging, even with its innovative features. Unlike newer AI-driven email services, Yahoo Mail does not offer AI automation that eliminates manual inbox management processes like labeling or filtering. Customization options are limited to appearance, lacking the capacity for creating workflow-specific views or personalized automation.

Another major annoyance Yahoo users face is that the free version of the email service displays visual ads, which are distracting and hinder productivity. They also take up screen space, making navigating and managing emails difficult.

Aside from a calendar and a notepad, Yahoo doesn’t offer any key productivity tools but allows you to integrate with some open-source third-party tools that you may find helpful. The downside is that this forces you to switch between multiple applications when you use Yahoo Mail as part of your work tools, reducing your overall efficiency.

If you need a highly tailored, productivity-driven, distraction-free emailing service to replace your Yahoo account, consider alternatives like Notion Mail.

Take back your time with Notion Mail

Notion Mail is an AI-first, smart email provider that allows you to adapt your inbox to your needs, giving you complete control over your emails. With its innovative “inboxes within an inbox” design, you can create a dedicated view or layout for different workloads and projects, optimizing your workflow.

Notion Mail harnesses the power of AI to automate your manual, repetitive tasks so you can concentrate on your most important tasks. You get a self-organizing inbox, which automatically labels emails based on your prompts and generates response suggestions for you.

With Notion Mail, you can beat the email overload and avoid distracting visuals like ads in your project view. You’ll never miss a message again because the tool helps you prioritize critical information with intuitive features and tailored views.

Advanced features in a clean user interface

Notion Mail has all you need to complete your tasks without bottlenecks. Thanks to its functional user interface, every feature is easy to navigate. Here’s how the platform helps you reclaim your time:

Auto-sort and label emails: Set simple rules to let AI handle the organization so you can focus on communication. Schedule meetings directly from your email: Insert a scheduling button or use the short command /schedule in your email and avoid the endless back-and-forth of meeting scheduling.Set reusable email templates: Save time on writing repetitive emails by inserting pre-written templates with a single click.Get email summaries: Quickly grasp the key points of lengthy messages using AI-powered email summaries.Generate instant replies: Address a high volume of emails quickly and efficiently with AI-suggested replies.Explore the Notion ecosystem: Get free access to Notion Calendar and important AI features, with the possibility to include add-ons like Notion AI for a cohesive productivity-focused ecosystem.Create minimalist project views: Tailor your inbox to show only the emails you need for specific tasks or projects.

Auto-sort and label emails: Set simple rules to let AI handle the organization so you can focus on communication.

Schedule meetings directly from your email: Insert a scheduling button or use the short command /schedule in your email and avoid the endless back-and-forth of meeting scheduling.

Set reusable email templates: Save time on writing repetitive emails by inserting pre-written templates with a single click.

Get email summaries: Quickly grasp the key points of lengthy messages using AI-powered email summaries.

Generate instant replies: Address a high volume of emails quickly and efficiently with AI-suggested replies.

Explore the Notion ecosystem: Get free access to Notion Calendar and important AI features, with the possibility to include add-ons like Notion AI for a cohesive productivity-focused ecosystem.

Create minimalist project views: Tailor your inbox to show only the emails you need for specific tasks or projects.

How to get started with Notion Mail

You can set up Notion Mail by following these quick steps:

Sign up with your Gmail or Google accountExplore Notion Mail and its robust AI features

Sign up with your Gmail or Google account

Explore Notion Mail and its robust AI features

Notion Mail is free to use and offers many advanced productivity features, but if you want to enhance your customization and automation further, you can get the Notion AI add-on.

Bonus read: Need more help with deleting email accounts and finding better alternatives? Check out our in-depth guides below:

How to delete an iCloud email accountHow to remove an Outlook account from iPhone and AndroidHow to remove a Gmail account from a phoneHow to remove a Gmail account from an iPhoneApple Mail vs. OutlookBest ProtonMail alternativesGmail vs. Apple MailOffice 365 vs. OutlookBest Gmail client options

How to delete an iCloud email account

How to remove an Outlook account from iPhone and Android

How to remove a Gmail account from a phone

How to remove a Gmail account from an iPhone

Apple Mail vs. Outlook

Best ProtonMail alternatives

Gmail vs. Apple Mail

Office 365 vs. Outlook

Best Gmail client options