Title: GIC, Sequoia, Index purchase Notion shares in private tender offer
Published Date: 2026-01-26T08:00-08:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/gic-sequoia-index-purchase-notion-shares

TL;DR:

Investors purchased shares from current and former Notion employees in a private tender offerThe total tender was $270M at an $11B valuationNew investor GIC joined previous investors Sequoia Capital and Index Ventures in this tender offerWe waived the one-year vesting cliff on options for current employees

Investors purchased shares from current and former Notion employees in a private tender offer

The total tender was $270M at an $11B valuation

New investor GIC joined previous investors Sequoia Capital and Index Ventures in this tender offer

We waived the one-year vesting cliff on options for current employees

Today, we’re pleased to share that we held a private tender offering over the last quarter. Returning investors Sequoia Capital and Index Ventures are doubling down on their commitment to Notion, while we’re thrilled to partner with new investor GIC, a global institutional investor. These investors are purchasing shares directly from current and former Notion employees, for a total tender of around $270M at an $11B valuation.

In 2025, Notion’s growth rate accelerated on the back of AI adoption within our platform. At the end of last year, more than 50% of our ARR came from AI-enabled customers, and that percentage more than doubled over the last year.

This growth over the last 12 months is happening globally, especially in the Asia-Pacific (APAC) region—which is why we recently opened an office in Singapore, alongside our other regional offices in Tokyo, Seoul, and Sydney.

One of the reasons we’re so thrilled to partner with GIC is because of their expertise in supporting growth in APAC and across the globe, as well as their commitment to the long term. They think in decades, not quarters. When we thought about who would be a values-aligned investor for the future of Notion, GIC was an obvious choice.

Taking the long term view is what led us to open up this tender offer. Notion’s mission is to help people build beautiful tools for their life’s work—and that is just as true for our employees as our customers. By providing some financial liquidity now for Notinos and their families, we hope they continue to build their life’s work at Notion.

We’ve also had many talented people join Notion this year who have already contributed high impact work to our growth this past year, and we wanted to make sure as many employees as possible could participate in this tender offer. That’s why we removed the one-year vesting cliff on options, so almost every Notino had the option to participate.

We’re grateful to be building a generational company with world-class talent around the globe, and to partner with long-term investors who believe in our mission. 2025 was the best year yet for Notion, and 2026 is going to be even more exciting, with new products like custom agents bringing more ways for people, teams, and companies to build their life’s work with Notion.