Title: Gmail app for Mac—top 5 options reviewed
Published Date: 2024-11-22T16:00+02:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/gmail-app-for-mac

As a web app on desktop devices, Gmail comes with notable limitations that hinder your efforts to develop a cohesive workflow. This issue is particularly noticeable on Mac devices, which operate in Apple’s closed ecosystem and don’t offer as much flexibility as those supporting other operating systems.

Luckily, macOS supports various third-party email clients that bring Gmail to desktop and laptop devices. In this guide, you’ll learn why using these apps is superior to sticking with the Gmail web app. We’ll also:

Review five popular Gmail apps for Mac you can considerFind out what a good option should offer

Review five popular Gmail apps for Mac you can consider

Find out what a good option should offer

Why you should use a Gmail client for Mac

The main reason to use a macOS Gmail client is that Google doesn’t offer a dedicated Gmail app for Mac (or other desktop devices for that matter). If you want to move away from the browser, third-party clients are the way to go.

Adopting one lets you overcome many limitations of the web app, such as:

Lack of seamless integration with other softwareOffline access to your inboxReal-time email notifications

Lack of seamless integration with other software

Offline access to your inbox

Real-time email notifications

Depending on your chosen Gmail client, you can get much more than the above, especially in the inbox organization area. Dedicated apps often come with features that automatically sort incoming mail, enable rule-based filtering, and remove distractions to help you achieve inbox zero.

A capable solution should also come with AI-powered features, such as automated email drafting, reply suggestions, email summaries, email scheduling, etc.

Given that no email client is universally better than others, this guide will outline and compare several options you should check out.

Best Gmail app for Mac—5 solutions worth considering

While cherry-picking Gmail apps for Mac, we focused on the following criteria:

Inbox organization featuresProductivity-boosting functionalitiesUser interface and ease of useCost-effectiveness

Inbox organization features

Productivity-boosting functionalities

User interface and ease of use

Cost-effectiveness

After examining various solutions, we’ve zeroed in on the following five Gmail Mac clients:

MimestreamMail for GmailBoxy SuiteSpikeNotion Mail

Mimestream

Mail for Gmail

Boxy Suite

Spike

Notion Mail

Below, you’ll find a concise review of each option, including its pricing, benefits, and shortcomings.

Bonus read: Looking for Gmail clients native to different operating systems instead of third-party options? Check out our Apple Mail vs. Outlook comparison to learn about the two popular options.

1. Mimestream

Mimestream is a Gmail Mac app that uses the Gmail API to carry over the best native features of the web app and adapt them to macOS. This includes Gmail’s advanced search function, which many Gmail clients fail to replicate effectively.

If you’ve used Apple’s native Mail app, you shouldn’t encounter any surprises as far as the user interface goes—Mimestream’s UI is largely the same, with the addition of Gmail’s inbox categories that keep your inbox more organized.

Mimestream lets you set labels to further organize your emails, and you can set up filtering rules that will trigger according to your pre-defined conditions. For example, you can automatically star or archive emails with certain words or those coming from specific senders.

Additional useful features include:

Email tracking preventionGmail aliasesEmail profiles (e.g., personal and work)Email templates

Email tracking prevention

Gmail aliases

Email profiles (e.g., personal and work)

Email templates

The app’s main downside is that it’s only available on macOS. While there have been talks about iOS and iPadOS versions, the team doesn’t have an ETA on it as of this writing.

Mimestream is also a Gmail-only client, so you can’t add accounts from other providers. Outlook support is currently in the works, though it’s unclear when it will be available.

Pricing

Mimestram offers two payment options:

Monthly: $4.99Annual: $49.99

Monthly: $4.99

Annual: $49.99

You can also choose between individual and group plans, though the price per person stays the same. There’s no free plan, but you can use a 14-day free trial to get a first-hand look at the app and see if it justifies the cost.

Pros and cons

Here’s a quick summary of Mimestream’s benefits and drawbacks:

ProsConsFully optimized for macOSFamiliar user interfaceVarious email organization featuresNo free planOnly available on macOS devices

Pros

Cons

Fully optimized for macOS

Familiar user interface

Various email organization features

No free plan

Only available on macOS devices

2. Mail for Gmail

Mail for Gmail is a simple yet robust Gmail client best suited for light users and those who don’t need any over-the-top features. The interface is similar to the Gmail web app, and this familiarity makes it easier to transition from a browser to a dedicated app.

You get the basic email organization features, such as:

LabelsInbox filtersBulk selection and deletion

Labels

Inbox filters

Bulk selection and deletion

As all of this comes with the Gmail web app, you won’t face a learning curve while using Mail for Gmail. The downside is that you may not be able to personalize the email experience due to a lack of advanced organization features.

Mail for Gmail lets you add multiple Gmail accounts, as well as accounts from other Google Workspace apps. This makes it a solid option if you want to centralize your accounts without ending up with a messy inbox. You can switch between accounts the same way you do from the web app to access different inboxes.

As for the downsides, several users have pointed out occasional glitches. Some of the most common issues they encountered include:

Not being able to log inNot seeing the app in the menu barEncountering random crashes

Not being able to log in

Not seeing the app in the menu bar

Encountering random crashes

Pricing

Mail for Gmail offers a one-time license for $9.99. There’s also an annual subscription, which seems a bit confusing. As of this writing, the App Store page says the annual cost is “as low as $3.99.”

Still, when you open the app, you’ll see pricing expressed in euros, with an annual subscription of €4.49. Under the annual cost, you’ll see a line saying, “Only $1.12/month,” which doesn’t add up.

There’s also no free plan—you only get a three-day free trial, which may not be enough to determine whether the app is worth investing in.

Pros and cons

The following table shows a brief summary of Mail for Gmail’s pros and cons:

ProsConsEasy to useInterface similar to the Gmail web appSupports multiple Gmail accountsPotential usability issuesConfusing pricing structureNo free plan

Pros

Cons

Easy to use

Interface similar to the Gmail web app

Supports multiple Gmail accounts

Potential usability issues

Confusing pricing structure

No free plan

Bonus read: Using Apple Mail as your Gmail client? See how the two options differ and discover the best alternatives to Apple Mail.

3. Boxy Suite

With a little over 2,200 users, Boxy Suite is a relatively new and underappreciated macOS Gmail app. Still, its user base includes professionals from some of the best-known companies like Netflix and Zoom, so the app is surely gaining traction—and for a good reason.

Unlike many competitors, Boxy Suite goes beyond Gmail to provide a dedicated desktop workspace that includes other apps from Google’s line-up, most notably:

Google CalendarGoogle KeepGoogle Contacts

Google Calendar

Google Keep

Google Contacts

All apps are available in a centralized interface, which gives you the features of Gmail and other Google Workspace apps in a clean layout that matches the UI of Mac’s built-in apps.

You can add multiple Gmail/Google accounts and switch between them seamlessly, thanks to Boxy Suite’s unique preloading feature. The app offers keyboard shortcuts you can use to switch accounts, which will load instantly.

Other noteworthy features include:

Email tracking detectionIntegrations with third-party tools (Todoist, Omnifocus, etc.)Reader mode

Email tracking detection

Integrations with third-party tools (Todoist, Omnifocus, etc.)

Reader mode

While Boxy Suite offers several customization features like dark mode and switching between the traditional and minimalistic Gmail layout, some users think the app could benefit from additional personalization options. Others have mentioned usability issues, most notably crashes and high loading times.

Pricing

Boxy Suite costs $49.99 per year. There are no additional tiers, monthly subscriptions, or a free plan. You only get a 14-day free trial to test the app’s features and assess its value for money.

This makes Boxy Suite less flexible than most Gmail clients and increases the risk of vendor lock-in. If you encounter notable issues during the subscription period, you’ll need to spend additional money on another option.

Pros and cons

Here’s a quick summary of Boxy Suite’s pros and cons:

ProsConsSupport for Google apps beyond GmailThird-party integrationsClean user interfacePotential crashes and other usability issuesNo free plan or monthly subscriptions

Pros

Cons

Support for Google apps beyond Gmail

Third-party integrations

Clean user interface

Potential crashes and other usability issues

No free plan or monthly subscriptions

4. Spike

Spike is a productivity and business communication app that lets you create teamspaces with various collaboration features, such as:

Conversational chat-like emailingChannelsCollaborative documents

Conversational chat-like emailing

Channels

Collaborative documents

If you don’t need the entire productivity suite, you can opt for Spike’s dedicated email app offered as a standalone product, which is what we’ll focus on here to avoid comparing apples to oranges.

Spike’s email app lets you add several Gmail accounts and supports other providers like Outlook, Yahoo, and iCloud. This versatility makes it an excellent choice for teams and individuals who need to manage various accounts.

The platform also comes with a comprehensive search feature, similar to Gmail’s, that lets you browse your inbox for messages, attachments, and other elements through simple keyword searches.

Spike leverages AI across the board to streamline various activities, such as:

Composing and replying to emailsSummarizing your inbox conversationsCreating and editing notes

Composing and replying to emails

Summarizing your inbox conversations

Creating and editing notes

Besides macOS, Spike offers support for Windows, iOS, and Android. This further expands the platform’s versatility and makes it applicable to users regardless of their platform or device.

Still, the app might not be equally optimized for each operating system. Users have complained about the mobile version being slow, so the experience might not be as smooth and intuitive as it is on desktop.

Pricing

If you only want Spike’s email app, you can use the free version with one email address. You get some basic features like conversational mail and a unified calendar, as well as 1GB of storage.

To unlock more options and use Spike with multiple email addresses, you can choose between two paid options:

Pro: $5/user per monthUltimate: $10/user per month

Pro: $5/user per month

Ultimate: $10/user per month

The only problem you might encounter is storage. Even with the highest tier, you’re limited to 20GB per user, which might not be enough for power users.

Pros and cons

The following table highlights the benefits and shortcomings of Spike’s email app:

ProsConsMultiplatform supportSupport for providers beyond GmailComprehensive AI featuresThe mobile version might not be smoothLimited storage even with paid versions

Pros

Cons

Multiplatform support

Support for providers beyond Gmail

Comprehensive AI features

The mobile version might not be smooth

Limited storage even with paid versions

5. Notion Mail

Notion Mail is an AI-powered Gmail client focused on creating a highly personalized email environment. It lets you add multiple Gmail addresses and fully tailor the interface of each account to compliment your workflow.

The app does this through custom views and layouts for individual workflows. If you use email for marketing, support, HR, or any other function, you can have specific layouts designed to maximize productivity and remove distractions.

You can further tailor Notion Mail to your workflow through automated labels. The app lets you set up rules for automatic email labeling and inbox organization around your focus areas and priorities to create a distraction-free environment.

Notion Mail offers a minimalistic interface aligned with the design of Apple’s ecosystem, seamlessly integrating into other macOS workflows. It also supports other operating systems, most notably:

WindowsiOSAndroid

Windows

iOS

Android

Besides advanced personalization, Notion Mail offers numerous productivity features, such as:

Keyboard shortcutsSlash commandsConfigurable and reusable email snippetsOne-click meeting scheduling with Notion Mail’s integrated calendar

Keyboard shortcuts

Slash commands

Configurable and reusable email snippets

One-click meeting scheduling with Notion Mail’s integrated calendar

Still, Notion Mail’s AI implementation is what sets it apart from the competition. The platform offers AI-powered autopilots, which enable intelligent sorting, filtering, and prioritization of emails. You can also use the capable AI writer to come up with instant replies and perform other actions, such as:

Generating email summariesWriting and scheduling follow-up emailsDrafting emails for specific purposes

Generating email summaries

Writing and scheduling follow-up emails

Drafting emails for specific purposes

Notion Mail zeroes in on Gmail to maximize the user experience, so it doesn’t support other providers. If you’ve already created a Notion account with Gmail, all you need to do is set up Notion Mail with the existing account. You can then leverage the app’s deep integration with the rest of the Notion ecosystem to build a streamlined workflow.

Because of its extensive AI functionalities, Notion Mail might come with a learning curve. Still, most users should be able to get the hang of it quickly enough.

Pricing

Notion Mail is free to use, so you can get started immediately by signing up with your Gmail/Google account. All productivity and customization features are available at no cost, and you get some AI features like email summaries and quick replies.

For high-end AI capabilities, you can subscribe to Notion’s AI add-on.

Pros and Cons

Here’s a brief overview of Notion Mail’s pros and cons:

ProsConsFree to useComplete workflow personalizationWorkflow automation through AI-powered featuresSupport for platforms beyond macOSOnly available to Gmail usersMight involve a learning curve

Pros

Cons

Free to use

Complete workflow personalization

Workflow automation through AI-powered features

Support for platforms beyond macOS

Only available to Gmail users

Might involve a learning curve

How to choose the best Gmail client for Mac

Each Gmail app for Mac offers a unique set of features, so it all comes down to your workflow specifics and priorities. Still, the right app should offer a universal set of benefits that include:

Familiar user interface: Opt for an app that either comes with an easy-to-navigate layout or a user interface based on the native design of macOS software.AI-enabled automation: Gmail clients that don’t leverage AI at this point are falling behind in terms of new-age productivity. Your chosen solution should use AI-powered email organization and generation to reduce your manual work.Cost-effectiveness: Your existing tech stack might already take up a chunk of your budget, and an email client shouldn’t contribute to this. Look for an option that delivers the best value-for-money features for your particular needs.Integrations with your current software: Native and third-party integrations make a world of difference to your efficiency. Look for an email client that connects to the rest of your tech stack to support a streamlined workflow.Customization: Whether you’re juggling multiple inboxes or have a team with varying email visibility needs, you need a Gmail client that fits specific uses through robust customization options.

Familiar user interface: Opt for an app that either comes with an easy-to-navigate layout or a user interface based on the native design of macOS software.

AI-enabled automation: Gmail clients that don’t leverage AI at this point are falling behind in terms of new-age productivity. Your chosen solution should use AI-powered email organization and generation to reduce your manual work.

Cost-effectiveness: Your existing tech stack might already take up a chunk of your budget, and an email client shouldn’t contribute to this. Look for an option that delivers the best value-for-money features for your particular needs.

Integrations with your current software: Native and third-party integrations make a world of difference to your efficiency. Look for an email client that connects to the rest of your tech stack to support a streamlined workflow.

Customization: Whether you’re juggling multiple inboxes or have a team with varying email visibility needs, you need a Gmail client that fits specific uses through robust customization options.

Uplevel your email workflows with Notion Mail

Notion Mail is the most capable Gmail macOS app option if you’re looking for AI-assisted efficiency—it’s free, easy to use, and adaptable to each user’s workflow. Whether you’re a startup founder, SMB owner, freelancer, or any professional looking to remove clutter and redundancies from the email experience, it can be an excellent fit.

This is particularly true if you need an app that doesn’t require back-and-forth with the rest of your productivity suite. Notion’s ecosystem lets you create a comprehensive workspace for all the key everyday activities, and it seamlessly integrates with major platforms to centralize all tasks and workflows.

Most importantly, Notion Mail simplifies emailing by removing tasks like:

Scheduling meetings manually through threads and email chains (Notion Mail lets you do it through a simple slash command)Reading the entire email to extract a few key points (Notion’s AI takes care of that)Coming up with emails or replies from scratch (you can use snippets and generative AI to do it)

Scheduling meetings manually through threads and email chains (Notion Mail lets you do it through a simple slash command)

Reading the entire email to extract a few key points (Notion’s AI takes care of that)

Coming up with emails or replies from scratch (you can use snippets and generative AI to do it)

Get started with Notion Mail

Creating a Notion Mail account is as simple as it gets. Sign up with your Gmail or Google account, and you’re set with an inbox that organizes itself!

If you want to maximize the app’s automation capabilities, explore the Notion AI add-on and its features.

Bonus read: Have more email-related queries? Check out these guides:

Does Gmail delete old emails?How to remove a Gmail account from a phoneHow to remove a Gmail account from an iPhoneBusiness Gmail vs. personal GmailHow to delete all promotions in Gmail—a step-by-step guideHow to remove an Outlook account from an iPhoneHow to delete a Yahoo accountHow to delete iCloud mail

Does Gmail delete old emails?

How to remove a Gmail account from a phone

How to remove a Gmail account from an iPhone

Business Gmail vs. personal Gmail

How to delete all promotions in Gmail—a step-by-step guide

How to remove an Outlook account from an iPhone

How to delete a Yahoo account

How to delete iCloud mail