Title: Gmail vs. Apple Mail: Efficiency, usability, and features
Published Date: 2024-11-22T11:00+02:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/gmail-vs-apple-mail

Based on 2024 statistics, Apple and Gmail are the two most used email clients globally, with a combined market share of about 88%. The comparison between Gmail and Apple Mail is almost a battle of equals because of the core nature of these services.

Both are easy to set up on Android/iOS devices and have an almost indispensable quality for average users. However, the rising need for efficient workflows and seamless integration has made many users question the platforms’ capabilities.

Our comprehensive article outlines the Apple Mail vs. Gmail experience across five crucial factors:

Setup and integrationsFeaturesUser interfacePlans and pricingProductivity tools and workflow optimization

Setup and integrations

Features

User interface

Plans and pricing

Productivity tools and workflow optimization

A quick note on Apple Mail app vs. Gmail

Before we dive into the comparison, know that Apple Mail is an email client that comes with various Apple devices. Gmail is a full-fledged email service used for sending and receiving messages and files that also serves as an email client on mobile devices.

The Apple Mail app can be labeled as iPhone Mail, Mailbox, or Mail on different devices. Apple Mail’s default email service is iCloud Mail, but the client can be integrated with other email services like Outlook.com, Microsoft Exchange, Yahoo!, and Gmail. We’ll focus on iCloud Mail vs. Gmail services in this article.

Gmail vs. iCloud Mail: Setup and integrations

Gmail is Google’s free email service that can be accessed via any browser or dedicated iOS and Android apps. Setting up a Gmail account is fairly simple, but you do have to enter personal information to complete the registration.

Gmail integrates with products from Google Workspace (previously G Suite), allowing users access to productivity apps, such as Calendar, Docs, Sheets, and Drive.

iCloud Mail also gives you an effortless setup, but only on Apple devices. For Android and other platforms not attached to an Apple ID, the configuration can be a bit frustrating as you need to create an app-specific password for your iCloud email address for multi-device access. iCloud email can automatically connect with other products within the Apple ecosystem, including iCloud Drive and Calendar.

Ultimately, your choice of email service depends on your preferred ecosystem and the devices you primarily use.

Gmail vs. iCloud Mail: Features

Gmail and iCloud Mail have an array of features that facilitate personal and professional email communication. Both services allow you to customize messages by using various fonts and formats. Other common functions include:

Contact integrationSearch and filterDefault and custom foldersCollaboration toolsTwo-factor authentication (2FA) optionMulti-device syncCustom domains (with paid plans)Email aliasesDefault replies

Contact integration

Search and filter

Default and custom folders

Collaboration tools

Two-factor authentication (2FA) option

Multi-device sync

Custom domains (with paid plans)

Email aliases

Default replies

Here are four key feature differences users notice while using Gmail and iCloud Mail:

Spam filtering: Both Apple and Google provide spam filters, but Gmail’s filter may be too aggressive and lack precision. Users have to constantly check their spam folder to ensure an important message didn’t end up there.Smart folder categorization: Gmail’s intelligent folder categorization automatically organizes incoming emails into Primary, Promotions, and Social folders, which is useful for task prioritization. Apple is yet to come up with a feature to auto-categorize incoming mail into specific categories.Adding attachments: The process of adding attachments is more straightforward with Gmail than with iCloud Mail. The provider also allows sending password-protected ZIP files.Advanced features: Gmail already has advanced features like email monitoring and confidential messaging, but Apple is catching up with fresh updates.

Spam filtering: Both Apple and Google provide spam filters, but Gmail’s filter may be too aggressive and lack precision. Users have to constantly check their spam folder to ensure an important message didn’t end up there.

Smart folder categorization: Gmail’s intelligent folder categorization automatically organizes incoming emails into Primary, Promotions, and Social folders, which is useful for task prioritization. Apple is yet to come up with a feature to auto-categorize incoming mail into specific categories.

Adding attachments: The process of adding attachments is more straightforward with Gmail than with iCloud Mail. The provider also allows sending password-protected ZIP files.

Advanced features: Gmail already has advanced features like email monitoring and confidential messaging, but Apple is catching up with fresh updates.

Gmail vs. iCloud Mail: User interface

Gmail and iCloud Mail have organized and intuitive user interfaces. They offer similar mobile gesture controls for deleting and archiving messages, but iCloud may have better accessibility features thanks to Apple’s 3D Touch technology. Both services are easy to use across different devices.

Gmail and Apple have tried to keep their email services clutter-free, but the latter succeeds in presenting a cleaner inbox. It should be noted that Gmail’s smart labels, filters, and overall inbox functions enable you to organize your inbox better and access information more easily, although most users do not use all the customization features available to them.

The conclusion is that Gmail works well on all devices, while iCloud Mail may offer a smoother experience on iPhone, iPad, and Mac systems.

Gmail vs. iCloud Mail: Plans and pricing

Gmail is free and offers 15 GB of storage to each user. If you need more storage, you have to switch to a Google Workspace paid plan offering an ad-free experience and bundled features for various Google apps.

Check out the different paid subscriptions available for Google Workspace in the U.S.:

PlanPricing (per user/per month)Storage (per user)Business Starter$8.4030 GBBusiness Standard$16.802 TBBusiness Plus$26.405 TBEnterpriseCustom-setScalable

Plan

Pricing (per user/per month)

Storage (per user)

Business Starter

$8.40

30 GB

Business Standard

$16.80

2 TB

Business Plus

$26.40

5 TB

Enterprise

Custom-set

Scalable

iCloud Mail’s free plan comes with only 5 GB of free storage. If you require more storage, you will have to upgrade to iCloud+. Refer to the image below for pricing of the different iCloud+ plans available in the U.S.:

Besides the storage aspect, Gmail and iCloud plans are difficult to compare due to features targeting different user groups. Google Workspace plans are more tuned to business needs, while iCloud plans provide a rich experience within the Apple ecosystem.

Gmail vs. iCloud Mail: Productivity tools and workflow optimization

Gmail provides a wide range of productivity tools to enhance your workflow and help you stay organized, but it’s important to note that many of the more powerful features are reserved for Google Workspace subscribers.

With a free account, you can automatically sort your emails into tabs and use filters to manage incoming messages, which is quite useful. You can also get help writing emails with Smart Compose and Smart Reply. However, if you want AI-assisted writing that feels more personalized, you’ll need the paid plan.

Essentially, Gmail is designed to work on any device, which is a big plus. However, you’ll find some limitations if you need more advanced productivity tools. For instance, Gmail doesn’t offer AI-automated email processing that can help you manage a high volume of emails with simple prompts. You’ll need to go through the tasking manual process of setting up complex rules to sort specific emails.

iCloud Mail, on the other hand, keeps things simple, especially if you also use other Apple products. It works well with Apple’s Focus Modes to help you avoid distractions, and you can use a VIP List to screen non-essential contacts. The catch with iCloud Mail is that it’s not quite flexible if you use devices outside the Apple ecosystem since it can only be accessed via webmail or third-party email clients.

If you wish to have absolute control over your workflow and customize your email experience, opt for a productivity-focused email service like Notion Mail, which offers advanced customization and integration.

Efficiency, usability, or features? No need to choose with Notion Mail!

Notion Mail is a builder-focused solution offering an inbox that streamlines your email experience. It tackles the common challenges Gmail and iCloud Mail users have, and with its AI-assisted interface, you’ll enjoy speed, ease of use, and structured organization, enhancing your workflow productivity.

Being a productivity-oriented service, Notion Mail understands the common challenges you have to deal with, including:

Struggling to sift through numerous emails to find what you needWasting time manually sorting and replying to emails repetitivelyFeeling stuck with a one-size-fits-all inbox that does nothing for your projectsDealing with the difficulty of integrating your emails with other work tools

Struggling to sift through numerous emails to find what you need

Wasting time manually sorting and replying to emails repetitively

Feeling stuck with a one-size-fits-all inbox that does nothing for your projects

Dealing with the difficulty of integrating your emails with other work tools

Notion Mail eliminates the need to sacrifice workflow efficiency just because you want specific features. You don’t have to give up a friendly interface for seamless integrations, either.

How Notion Mail features work

You don’t need a paid subscription to access Notion Mail’s advanced productivity features, unlike traditional providers that gate their most advanced features. Here’s how the email service helps you reclaim your inbox:

AI autopilot: Let AI take the reins and automatically label and prioritize your email by using prompts. Customizable views: Create focused spaces for each of your projects, tasks, or clients to eliminate sifting through irrelevant items. Create dedicated layouts for specific workflows and use tags and labels for efficient categorization. Easy scheduling: Have your recipients quickly schedule meetings right from within your emails by using the short command /schedule or inserting a scheduling button, eliminating the back-and-forth of appointment setting. Snippets: Save your most-used email responses as templates for quick insertion, keeping your communication consistent without repetitive typing. Seamless Notion integration: Link your email directly to Notion docs, wikis, or projects, building a seamless workflow that centralizes relevant information in a hub.Summarize: Get a quick grasp of lengthy emails by hovering over the emails and views so you can understand the main points and take immediate action.

AI autopilot: Let AI take the reins and automatically label and prioritize your email by using prompts.

Customizable views: Create focused spaces for each of your projects, tasks, or clients to eliminate sifting through irrelevant items. Create dedicated layouts for specific workflows and use tags and labels for efficient categorization.

Easy scheduling: Have your recipients quickly schedule meetings right from within your emails by using the short command /schedule or inserting a scheduling button, eliminating the back-and-forth of appointment setting.

Snippets: Save your most-used email responses as templates for quick insertion, keeping your communication consistent without repetitive typing.

Seamless Notion integration: Link your email directly to Notion docs, wikis, or projects, building a seamless workflow that centralizes relevant information in a hub.

Summarize: Get a quick grasp of lengthy emails by hovering over the emails and views so you can understand the main points and take immediate action.

Migrate to Notion Mail in a few steps

Switching to a new email service can often be complex and time-consuming, but not with Notion Mail. It simplifies the process by allowing you to sign up with your existing Gmail or Google account in a few steps:

Visit the signup pageConnect your Gmail or Google accountEnter your inbox and explore the features

Visit the signup page

Connect your Gmail or Google account

Enter your inbox and explore the features

Notion Mail offers a wealth of free advanced features that can significantly boost your productivity. However, if you need even further automation and AI-powered enhancements, consider exploring the Notion AI add-on.

Bonus read: Explore more helpful Gmail and Apple Mail comparisons and reviews to find the most fitting service:

Apple Mail vs. OutlookGmail clientBusiness Gmail vs. personal GmailGmail app for MacGmail desktop app

Apple Mail vs. Outlook

Gmail client

Business Gmail vs. personal Gmail

Gmail app for Mac

Gmail desktop app