Title: Hello, Australia!
Published Date: 2025-04-01T00:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/hello-australia

The energy here in Australia has been incredible this past week. Seeing Notion come to life on everything from hand-painted murals to digital billboards, I’ve felt the warmth and excitement from our Australian community at every turn. Millions of Australians already use Notion to bring their ideas to life, organize their work, and build amazing things.

Since joining as Notion’s first Australian employee last May, I’ve seen our Sydney team grow to fifteen passionate people dedicated to supporting teams across the Asia-Pacific region. We’re here because we believe in the immense potential of Australian businesses and creators.

But we’ve heard that there’s too much standing in the way of that potential. Our research showed that Australian companies lose $228 billion to inefficient work processes. Employees are losing precious hours each day searching for the information they need to do their jobs, often caused by the sprawl of tools at work. Companies know it’s time for change—seventy-three percent of employees want to unify their tech stacks. And we’ve already started to see change from companies that rely on Notion. One customer, Qwilr, a sales-automation platform, has reduced internal meetings by over ten hours a week!

So far, the response from our community has been invigorating. Our recent Cafe Notion and community meet-ups in Sydney were filled with enthusiastic users sharing their Notion setups and swapping tips. And we heard from customers like Linktree and Investment NSW about how they’ve transformed their work using Notion. “When we first started using Notion, we had a small, simple teamspace,” says George Turnbull, Senior Strategy & Operations Manager at Linktree. “Fast forward, and with 5× the headcount, it’s now a thriving ecosystem where we track projects, run scorecards, and so much more.”

To our Australian community: Thank you for the incredible welcome. Whether you’re taking notes in university lectures, launching the next great Australian startup, or transforming how your enterprise works, we’re excited to work alongside you and help shape the future of work, right here in Australia.

Get in touch with our Sydney team to learn how Notion can help you build something amazing.