Title: How to delete an iCloud email account: A detailed guide
Published Date: 2025-02-28T00:00+02:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/how-to-delete-icloud-email

While iCloud Mail is the default email provider for many Apple users, there are various reasons to explore alternatives. You may need enhanced productivity features or a more streamlined email management experience. Whatever the reasons, this article will explain how to delete an iCloud email account.

If you only want to declutter your correspondence, this tutorial will also show you:

How to mass-delete emails on iCloudHow to remove an iCloud email account from your iPhoneWhat email service providers might be worthy alternatives to iCloud Mail

How to mass-delete emails on iCloud

How to remove an iCloud email account from your iPhone

What email service providers might be worthy alternatives to iCloud Mail

How to delete an iCloud email account via browser

Deleting an iCloud email address also means permanently clearing out any associated data, such as:

Contacts EmailsCalendar events

Contacts

Emails

Calendar events

If you’re unsure of whether you’ll need these in the future, make backups before proceeding. After that, you can delete your iCloud email address by following these steps:

Open your web browserVisit the Apple ID Management pageSign in and go to your iCloud SettingsGo to the Data & Privacy pageChoose the Manage Your Data optionConfirm your identity via two-factor authentication if you have it enabledScroll down to the Mail category and click on ManageChoose the Delete Email Address optionConfirm your choice on the pop-up window by clicking on Delete from Account

Open your web browser

Visit the Apple ID Management page

Sign in and go to your iCloud Settings

Go to the Data & Privacy page

Choose the Manage Your Data option

Confirm your identity via two-factor authentication if you have it enabled

Scroll down to the Mail category and click on Manage

Choose the Delete Email Address option

Confirm your choice on the pop-up window by clicking on Delete from Account

Once you've deleted your iCloud email account, update other accounts or email services with your new email address.

How to back up iCloud data

Making a backup of the data before deleting your email account will ensure you don’t lose anything important in the transition to a new email account, like photos, messages, and app configurations.

Here’s a step-by-step guide to exporting your iCloud emails:

Visit iCloud.com Sign in with your Apple IDGo to Mail Click the checkboxes next to the messages you want to export (to select multiple emails, hold the Command key on Mac or Ctrl key on Windows keyboards)Choose between Export as EML and Export as PDF optionsSelect where you’ll save the exported filesClick Save

Visit iCloud.com

Sign in with your Apple ID

Go to Mail

Click the checkboxes next to the messages you want to export (to select multiple emails, hold the Command key on Mac or Ctrl key on Windows keyboards)

Choose between Export as EML and Export as PDF options

Select where you’ll save the exported files

Click Save

To export your iCloud Calendar data, follow these steps:

Launch the Calendar app on your Apple deviceChoose the calendar from the left-hand sidebarOpen the File section from the upper toolbarClick on ExportChoose your desired locationClick Save

Launch the Calendar app on your Apple device

Choose the calendar from the left-hand sidebar

Open the File section from the upper toolbar

Click on Export

Choose your desired location

Click Save

Backing up your iCloud contacts is almost identical:

Open the Contacts app Open the View section from the toolbarChoose Show GroupsClick All ContactsOpen the File menuClick ExportChoose Export vCardPick a location and click Save

Open the Contacts app

Open the View section from the toolbar

Choose Show Groups

Click All Contacts

Open the File menu

Click Export

Choose Export vCard

Pick a location and click Save

How to mass-delete all emails on iCloud

Deleting opened emails regularly is an excellent way to keep your inbox clutter-free and organized. Emails take up your storage space, of which you only get 5 GB for free. After a few years of continuous use, you might need to delete all emails as they’re bound to pile up even with the best inbox maintenance habits.

You can easily mass-delete emails from your iPhone in a few steps:

Open the Apple Mail appChoose your iCloud account in MailboxesClick on EditChoose Select AllClick Delete

Open the Apple Mail app

Choose your iCloud account in Mailboxes

Click on Edit

Choose Select All

Click Delete

Once you click Select All, you can manually unselect the important emails you want to keep.

This process doesn’t delete your emails permanently—it only sends them to the Trash folder. To discard the emails completely, go to the Settings screen of your Mail app and tap Empty Bin.

How to remove an iCloud email address from your iPhone

You don’t necessarily need to delete your iCloud account permanently if you want to streamline email communication—you can remove one of your email addresses from your iPhone.

By removing an email account, you’ll still have all your emails and associated data, but they won’t be available on that specific device. You can access the account from your iPad or computer.

To remove an email account from your iPhone, follow these steps:

Open SettingsGo to MailTap on AccountsChoose an email account to removeToggle the Use on this iPhone option off

Open Settings

Go to Mail

Tap on Accounts

Choose an email account to remove

Toggle the Use on this iPhone option off

The instructions aren’t limited to iCloud accounts—you can use the same process to remove a Gmail, Yahoo, Outlook, or any other email account from your iPhone. The only difference is that other email providers won’t have the Use on this iPhone toggle—there will be a Delete Account option instead.

Why deleting iCloud email might be the right call

While many owners of Apple devices use it, the iCloud email service comes with a few notable downsides, including:

Limited amount of free storageOptimization limited to iOS devicesLimited productivity enhancement features

Limited amount of free storage

Optimization limited to iOS devices

Limited productivity enhancement features

Limited amount of free storage

Most email services provide a certain amount of free storage with a basic account and require you to switch to a paid subscription to get more. Apple users get 5 GB of storage and a maximum of 20 MB for attachments.

The space isn’t reserved only for emails—the same 5 GB is shared between your calendar, backups, and documents. If you use iCloud to save photos, you’ll burn through that 5 GB quickly.

Not optimized for non-iOS devices

iCloud email doesn’t support POP email servers, limiting your server settings to IMAP.

POP protocols download all emails to your device and delete them from the email server. Your device is where the emails are stored, and switching to a different device means losing them unless you back them up manually.

With IMAP, your messages are stored on the server, and email services like iCloud Mail create temporary copies on your device while you’re viewing them. This allows you to access all emails from any device.

POP is less popular today, but IMAP comes with some security vulnerabilities—hackers who gain access to iCloud’s servers could obtain your emails, for example. While POP requires more configuration and is less user-friendly, some businesses and individuals still prefer it.

It’s not the end of the world for most users, but it’s clear that Apple primarily intended iCloud to be used with Apple Mail on iOS devices.

There’s no dedicated iCloud Mail app for Android devices. You can still access your emails via a mobile browser, but the user experience will be poor compared to a dedicated app.

Limited productivity enhancement features

While iCloud Mail provides a functional email service, users with more demanding productivity needs might find its built-in features limited for efficient inbox management. For instance, if you need advanced productivity and customization features to manage your inbox efficiently, you may need to explore alternative solutions.

iCloud Mail’s functionality is sufficient for basic email correspondence, but it lacks built-in tools for automatically sorting, labeling, and managing a high volume of emails. This can result in having to organize your inbox manually, which may be more demanding or time-consuming.

Even further, iCloud Mail offers limited flexibility in tailoring your inbox layout to specific personal or professional needs. It offers integration functions, such as syncing with the Mail app on all your Apple devices, and a few third-party integrations. However, this can be limiting for users who desire a tool with seamless integration for all their work applications.

If you are looking for an email service with more productivity and customization features than iCloud, Notion Mail may be a good alternative.

Notion Mail: Transforming inbox clutter into productivity

Notion Mail is an AI-first email service that helps you approach your inbox without an overwhelming sense of dread—it takes the stress out of email management and gives you a powerful productivity tool instead. The platform leverages several functionalities to help you:

Keep clutter at baySpeed up and automate email activitiesBoost your workflow efficiency

Keep clutter at bay

Speed up and automate email activities

Boost your workflow efficiency

The core Notion Mail features that transform your inbox include:

Feature How it worksAutopilotThis feature empowers you to filter your inbox intelligently. Like a personalized email assistant, once you set simple prompts, such as “Label all client emails as urgent,” it immediately automates your tasks. /Schedule commandYou can use the /schedule command or insert a scheduling button like Calendly directly in your emails. This allows recipients to choose a time that works for them directly from your calendar without going back and forth.Customizable viewsNotion Mail allows you to create tailored views for your projects, clients, or tasks. You can customize your layout to suit your needs so you only see what’s relevant when needed.SnippetsThis feature allows you to save valuable time and maintain consistent messaging. All you need to do is create reusable email templates and insert them with one click.

Feature

How it works

Autopilot

This feature empowers you to filter your inbox intelligently. Like a personalized email assistant, once you set simple prompts, such as “Label all client emails as urgent,” it immediately automates your tasks.

/Schedule command

You can use the /schedule command or insert a scheduling button like Calendly directly in your emails. This allows recipients to choose a time that works for them directly from your calendar without going back and forth.

Customizable views

Notion Mail allows you to create tailored views for your projects, clients, or tasks. You can customize your layout to suit your needs so you only see what’s relevant when needed.

Snippets

This feature allows you to save valuable time and maintain consistent messaging. All you need to do is create reusable email templates and insert them with one click.

Sign up for a Notion Mail account

With Notion Mail, you never have to compromise on efficiency due to costs. Notion Mail is free to use and offers robust AI features that keep your workflow smooth and tidy.

Because Notion Mail seamlessly integrates into the full Notion productivity suite, you can achieve even more without switching between third-party apps.

Notion Mail’s default features, such as Notion Calendar, deliver an already unique email management experience that helps you boost your organization and productivity. But if you need a more advanced experience, you can consider getting the Notion AI add-on.

Getting started with Notion Mail is simple. Sign up with your Gmail or Google account, set up your workflow, and begin your journey to productivity!

Bonus read: Discover alternative email services and solutions to common issues in our detailed guides:

Gmail vs. Apple MailApple Mail vs. OutlookBest Gmail app for Mac

Gmail vs. Apple Mail

Apple Mail vs. Outlook

Best Gmail app for Mac