Title: Kim Scott's Radical Candor Approach to Workplace Justice
Published Date: 2021-12-03T09:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/kim-scott-just-work-template

Bias, prejudice, and bullying happen in the workplace every day — but there still aren't many tools to process and rectify these instances when they happen. Leave them to fester for too long, and entire companies can fall apart.

Bestselling author Kim Scott, who's helped hundreds of teams communicate better through Radical Candor, has partnered with veteran Chief People Officer Trier Bryant to tackle these injustices with their new Just Work framework. Put it into practice with her Notion template, which includes practical steps to log any injustices you encounter, identify your role, plan your response, and push your team toward a fair outcome.

Duplicate the template →

Quickly collect your thoughts on workplace injustices

Responding to any type of injustice is never an easy task. For every instance, answer pre-made questions from Kim's framework to confidently craft a response and share with those involved. Or if you didn't know how to react, use this space to log what happened so you can take action in the future.

Identify the role you played

When it comes to workplace injustices, everyone plays a role. By understanding these roles and the responsibility you have when playing them, you can work towards solutions with your team and help prevent further problems in the future. For each role, the template provides helpful information and a starting point for any injustices you want to correct.

Figure out what happened and the injustice's root cause

Injustices in the workplace are often labeled as just one thing: bias. But it's more complicated than that — the template includes Kim's breakdown of injustices into bias (not meaning it), prejudice (meaning it), and bullying (being mean) so you can more effectively respond to each situation.

What to say when you don't know what to say

While it's important to know how to distinguish between the three types of injustices, it's even more important to know which actions to take when confronted with them. Short prompts allow you to see these examples in context and to decide which course of action to take moving forward.

Document what's happening to figure out what to do about it

Track the actions you’ve taken for each instance by using checkboxes in the database to keep a clear record of your progress. You can also see at a glance which instances you’ve shared publicly or reported to HR in separate filtered views.

Try the template now →