Title: Meet the students of Notion
Published Date: 2024-09-17T09:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/meet-the-students-of-notion

Ever wondered how UC Berkeley students keep everything together? From classes to clubs to rating the pizzas at Jupiter, they’re turning to Notion to manage it all.

We hit campus to give away swag and chat with some of our 40,000-strong community of UC Berkeley users. Here’s what we learned about how they’re using Notion to make college life manageable—and, er, “cute”.

We met close to a thousand students. Many of you use Notion to manage everything in your lives, from running student clubs and taking class notes to organizing your social calendars and rating your professors from last semester.

When we asked why you love using Notion, we got all sorts of answers. Here’s just a taste of what you shared:

For Sneha, a freshman, Notion has become her one-stop shop for everything from managing finances to planning her gym sessions. “I love Notion because it’s so user friendly, and I can completely customize it by myself,” she said.One anonymous grad student says he would simply be lost without it. “I use Notion and Notion Calendar to run my life. They live on literally every device I own,” he said.Kim, a second-year student, says it’s how she stays productive. “School, gym, work, habit tracking,” she said when asked what she uses Notion for. “And it’s so modular—I can use tables, lists, graphs, whatever I want. It’s my everyday tool.”We’re not sure exactly what Shayla uses Notion for (she just said “everything”), but we do know she has a lot of fun with it. “It’s so cutesy and really easy to use,” she said.

For Sneha, a freshman, Notion has become her one-stop shop for everything from managing finances to planning her gym sessions. “I love Notion because it’s so user friendly, and I can completely customize it by myself,” she said.

One anonymous grad student says he would simply be lost without it. “I use Notion and Notion Calendar to run my life. They live on literally every device I own,” he said.

Kim, a second-year student, says it’s how she stays productive. “School, gym, work, habit tracking,” she said when asked what she uses Notion for. “And it’s so modular—I can use tables, lists, graphs, whatever I want. It’s my everyday tool.”

We’re not sure exactly what Shayla uses Notion for (she just said “everything”), but we do know she has a lot of fun with it. “It’s so cutesy and really easy to use,” she said.

Students, you’re using Notion in ways we never imagined, like to build and race formula electric cars. But what we discovered at Cal wasn’t just about UC Berkeley—it was a window into how students everywhere are using Notion to stay organized (and sane) for the year ahead.

Ready to get started? Head over to notion.com/students to sign up for free, and don’t forget to check out our latest school templates to give you a running start.