Title: Meet Mick Hodgins, Notion’s new EMEA GM
Published Date: 2025-09-03T00:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/meet-mick-hodgins-notions-new-emea-gm

At Notion we’re fortunate to have a truly global customer community: Eighty percent of our users hail from outside the US, and I’ve met with companies from around the world building incredible things with Notion. Growing our international footprint is a priority for us, and this of course means finding the right leaders to help us scale.

That’s why I’m delighted to welcome Mick Hodgins as the new GM for EMEA.

Mick is a true builder who combines strategic vision with hands-on execution. During his thirteen years at Google, he drove impressive growth and led teams working with customers in more than twenty EMEA countries. He can rally people to meet ambitious goals—exactly the kind of leader we need to continue our growth in the region.

I recently sat down with Mick to talk about what brought him to Notion and his vision for our next chapter in EMEA.

Pravesh Mistry: What drew you to Notion?

Mick Hodgins: Notion has a rare mix of product love, business momentum, and culture. The Notion community blows me away—their passion and advocacy is incredible, and it shows we’ve built something special. You don’t get to one hundred million users by accident.

AI is transforming the SaaS landscape and EMEA is full of opportunity right now. The market for collaboration and productivity solutions is wide open. Notion’s AI ambitions—paired with a flexible product and a community of builders—means we’re poised to become the platform of choice for the next generation of knowledge workers.

I love the design and creative elements of Notion’s story, the utility and scope. Add in the craft, creativity, and builder mentality that’s so prevalent here—that problem-solver DNA—and working with kind, direct people. It all just felt right. I couldn’t pass up the chance to jump on this bus.

PM: Tell us about your background and path to this role.

MH: I’ve been blessed with a varied and interesting career, working in sales, general management, operations, and finance roles in international businesses of various shapes and sizes.

My time scaling the EMEA ads business at Google provided rich and challenging leadership experiences—navigating the pivot to mobile, the emergence of programmatic ad technology, the pandemic, AI. I learned to lead in complexity, galvanize teams when there’s no playbook, move quickly, and win together.

As a Dubliner who’s worked around the world—in the UK, South Africa, and Australia—building across borders is a theme in my career. I’m at my best when there are new products, markets, and relationships to explore and develop. That’s what gives me energy, and that’s why I was drawn to this role at Notion.

PM: What’s your vision for Notion in EMEA?

MH: EMEA is a mosaic, each market has its own culture and nuances. To succeed, we need to show up locally while operating as one EMEA team. I’m delighted that we’re opening new office hubs this quarter in London, Paris, and Munich to be closer to our customers and partners while continuing to grow our regional HQ in Dublin. We also need to understand the needs of local customers and build trust—for example, establishing EU data residency, as we’re now doing, is a critical step in that process.

My vision is to enable EMEA students, startups, and enterprises to build something they care about with Notion. There’s so much opportunity ahead, from London to Cape Town, Paris to Dubai.

Internally, I want Notion EMEA to be a place where great humans do the best work of their careers. Happy, high-performing teams building customers’ businesses and ecosystems together, all while learning, developing, and meeting their career goals with Notion. I want Notion to be the go-to solution for knowledge workers everywhere. What’s good for our customers and partners is good for Notion; we’ll grow together and build something special.

PM: What’s something people might not know about you from your LinkedIn?

MH: A couple of things. I’m passionate about all sports—I’m a poor runner and an average cyclist, but I’m pretty good at jumping rope. I definitely have a competitive spirit.

I was also a university debater, twice representing University College Dublin at the World Debating Championships. It taught me to listen, think on my feet, read an audience, and communicate with clarity.

PM: What should the EMEA team expect from your leadership style?

MH: I’m hands-on and collaborative. I stay close to teams, ask a lot of questions, and move quickly. I value clarity, accountability, and momentum. It’s all about setting the pace while taking time to celebrate wins and learn along the way.

I love big challenges and retain a healthy disrespect for the impossible. Show me a ten-foot wall and I’ll help you build an eleven-foot ladder. That’s the mindset I’ll bring to the team as we tackle ambitious goals together.

PM: I love it and look forward to building together, Mick!