Title: Toyota, Affirm, Mercury, and more get faster business results with certified Notion Solutions Partners
Published Date: 2025-09-15T00:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/solutions-partners

You know that feeling when you can see exactly what your team could accomplish with the right systems in place? When the vision is crystal clear, but the path to get there feels overwhelming?

Many teams dive in solo, building page by page, teamspace by teamspace. But without someone who can step back and see the whole picture, you often end up with piecemeal systems that work in isolation but don’t scale—or worse, create new silos that defeat the original purpose.

But some of the most successful Notion customers are those that have looked beyond their own walls for support. That’s where Notion’s Solutions Partners—certified experts who specialize in transforming vision into reality—come in. They’ve guided companies like Toyota as they rethink workflows, helped fintechs like Affirm replace entire tool stacks, and architected enterprise systems that actually stick.

Notion State enables Affirm to rapidly reach 95% adoption

At Affirm, thousands of employees were navigating a patchwork of tools—Asana, Google Docs, Excel, Confluence, Coda, Slack, and more. Each team had its own workflows, which created tons of information silos that made it impossible to build a truly company-wide operating system.

Working side-by-side with leaders across IT, Legal, Marketing, Product Design, and more, Notion State delivered a comprehensive deployment strategy that balanced immediate needs with long-term scalability. Their five-phase approach, from discovery to evolution, helped Affirm build connected systems designed for scale and impact.

The results speak for themselves: 95% adoption for knowledge management, significant cost savings from eliminating or reducing seats in other tools, and a unified workspace where information is trusted, accessible, and actionable.

Meet Notion State →

NorthSand and Toyota built automations that 3× workflow speed

Toyota’s Future Creation Center was bogged down in bottlenecks. With work scattered across multiple tools, teams spent more time searching for knowledge and prepping for meetings than innovating. What started as one employee’s effort to streamline these challenges became a complete wall-to-wall reimagining of how how their entire org works.

Working with NorthSand’s technical expertise, the team focused on custom automations, streamlined approval workflows, and centralized scheduling systems. NorthSand provided ongoing support to ensure the grassroots initiative took hold and evolved into a more robust system that could scale and support Toyota’s larger innovation goals.

With Notion, key workflows now run 3× faster, meeting prep time was cut in half, and the entire division stays aligned. Most importantly, Notion became the trusted daily tool that made cross-functional collaboration happen more naturally and peace of mind that made the work feel lighter.

Meet NorthSand →

MegazoneCloud helps JOYCITY unite hundreds of employees into a single, company-wide tool

As leading South Korean game developer JOYCITY started the transition to Notion from Jira, Confluence, and Microsoft, the process felt a bit overwhelming. They knew they needed a unified system where teams across planning, development, and business operations could collaborate more effectively. But onboarding hundreds of employees without disrupting work was daunting.

Working with MegazoneCloud, JOYCITY deployed a transition strategy that focused new projects in Notion while maintaining parallel systems during migration. MegazoneCloud’s solution engineers provided on-site training and managed technical complexities so JOYCITY could focus on work.

The shift stuck: Improved collaboration, improved search and document accessibility, and a scalable foundation for future growth of the company. As teams spent more time working in Notion with MegazoneCloud’s support, teams were able to not only streamline their work but fundamentally rethink how they work.

Meet MegazoneCloud →

Optemization transforms Mercury’s “lawless” workspace into a trusted operating system

Mercury’s years of rapid growth created what the team called a “lawless” Notion workspace. With well over 1,000 employees across nearly ninety teamspaces, Mercury started using Notion organically but 300,000 pages of content had quickly become outdated and untrustworthy.

They turned to Optemization for for a complete workspace overhaul. After a comprehensive audit of all content, Optemization implemented a three-phase approach that included new standard templates, a unified information architecture, and an automated Notion training system for new employees.

The cleanup was massive. After archiving over 63,000 pages, Mercury now has a single source of truth that enables teams to move faster with trusted information. Consistent teamspace structure across twenty departments has made Notion even more intuitive to use company-wide.

Meet Optemization →

The best outcomes happen when brilliant minds work together

We’ve always believed our community is our greatest strength. The creativity, innovation, and problem solving that happens when people come together around shared challenges is what makes the Notion community special.

Our Solutions Partners represent the best of that community—experts who have dedicated themselves to mastering Notion and helping others be successful. We want to ensure the companies that need these skills most can find the right partner to work with easily.

Ready to find yours? Head to our Solutions Partner directory →