Title: Welcome Pravesh, Notion’s Global Head of Sales
Published Date: 2024-08-19T09:00-07:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/welcome-pravesh

Meet our new Global Head of Sales, Pravesh Mistry! In this mini interview, he shares how his South African roots shape the way he views the world, his go-to interview question, and what he’s learned about Notion thus far. We’re thrilled to have him at the helm of our sales team. Welcome, Pravesh!

How did growing up in South Africa shape you?

I think we’re all raised with this idea of having a lot of resilience. Whatever situation we find ourselves in, there’s always this air of, “We’ll figure it out.”

What do you like most about being a dad?

Watching these little people grow up and develop personalities—they teach us as much as we teach them. They help me slow down a lot and they have a tendency to really simplify things that we have figured out how to complicate.

What was your first job?

From a very young age, I spent time with my dad and grandfather at the shop on the farm, and I learned what I realize now were the basics of selling.

What’s your favorite interview question?

What is the greatest lesson you’ve learned from either one of your parents? I find that that question drops the candidate into a place of authenticity, and it tells you a lot about how they look at the world and approach many things. It’s incredible, the types of stories you get off the back of that simple question.

What makes Notion’s culture unique?

There are many things! I’ve been here now for a few months, and I don’t think there’s been a single week that’s gone by that I haven’t been wowed by something. Whether it’s the facilities and what the people in our office do for us every day to make this an incredible place to work, or our product team releasing incredible products. It’s such a fast clip—I’ve been mesmerized by it. I think that’s really unique—to be able to balance the kindness and a great work-life balance, but at the same time, pace-set at a rate that I’ve never seen before.

Follow Pravesh on LinkedIn—he’s hiring!