Title: Notion templates for this year's back to school season.
Published Date: 2024-08-13T00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.notion.so/blog/were-so-back-to-school

Students,

We have a lot to thank you for.

We’re blown away by the creativity you bring to Notion, in the classroom and beyond.

From your beautifully customized personal websites and planners (we see those Spotify playlists) to the systems you’ve built to stay on top of your to-dos to the homepages you create to run your student organizations—you make Notion colorful.

We’re endlessly grateful for all the love you’ve shown through your @-mentions on social media, hype you share with your friends, and campus events and meetups you’ve organized sharing Notion with peers and classmates.

It’s been inspiring to see what you've accomplished. And to match your energy, we’re  throwing our biggest back to school campaign yet!

Your starter pack for the school year

Choosing classes, prepping move-in lists, deciding which clubs to join, organizing your syllabi. Deep breath.

We know getting ready for a new school year can be overwhelming, so we built a toolkit to stay on top of it all.

We saw a ton of hype from last year’s Notion’s Declassified School Survival Guide, made by our Campus Leaders and crammed with pro tips to stay organized in and out of the classroom.

Here's round two, your Starter Pack for this school year—an all-in-one collection of templates for staying on top of everything you’ve got going on, in and out of the classroom.

What’s in your pack? Here’s a tour, Vogue-style.

Your planner

It’s time to get organized y’all—now you can keep all your assignment deadlines, to-dos and activities gathered on one page. And make it your own little cafe with a Spotify embed—without spending $6 on that latte.

Your move-in checklist

We want you looking forward to the big day—not let stress kill the vibe.

So we put together a home base that’ll be just as cozy as your future dorm, with a list of items we have a feeling you might not want to forget.

Embed Pinterest mood boards and get inspired as you prep for your move!

Your job application tracker

Looking to land your first big Adult job or stay ahead of the curve with your first internship? P.S. we’re hiring.

Navigate recruitment season with ease by centralizing all your job applications, resumes, and application statuses in one place.

Your habit tracker

Make this the year you commit to your workout routine. For real.

Use this tracker to set up your habits and check them off—telling yourself to do things has never been more fun.

Student orgs run the world

Now that we’ve got schoolwork and job hunting out of the way, let’s get to the fun stuff—your clubs.

We’re incredibly inspired by students leaders from around the world who are driving impact in their communities and shaping the future of work—from The Stanford Daily to Product Club at Oxford University to Enactus at Yonsei University.

But we kept hearing the same thing over and over: keeping your club organized is challenging, especially as you add new members and try to stay in sync across a million tools for managing projects, planning events, and organizing meeting notes.

So, last year we launched our student orgs offer, to help student organizations collaborate and stay in sync with all their docs, project planning, and event management right in Notion—for free.

One year later, more than 9,000 student orgs across 4,000 campuses are powering their orgs on Notion, from UC Berkeley to Seoul National University.

Campus Leaders go global 🌏

Notion Campus Leaders are the backbone of Notion, hosting events, sharing content, building templates and resources, providing product feedback, and more.

Last year our Campus Leaders hosted 500 global events (that’s more than one event a day!). From collaborations with student orgs to build-a-thons, study sessions, and even a volunteer gig with a local cat cafe, Campus Leaders continuously find innovative ways to share and teach Notion to their communities.

We received more most Campus Leader applications this year than ever, and in a few weeks we’ll welcome our third cohort of leaders—the most diverse and globally representative yet!

We can’t wait to see them hype up their campuses with exciting events this back to school season.

Join the fun on your campus →

And as a sweet treat, get inspired by templates made by our Campus Leaders—from organizing your move-in checklists to running your club events.

As you might have gathered by now, back to school is our favorite season here at Notion HQ.

And we are cooking. Check back here very soon to meet the students building and leading our Notion community.

Watch this space.